[Music]
welcome to Chapter eight
this is say another chapter that's
largely about mathematics we had the
reality of abstractions which at least
in part was about mathematics and this
one is a window on the Infinity and in
the window on infinity we're really
laying the groundwork for some other
material that is to come about the
multiverse so the motivation really is
to speak about quantum theory and how to
understand infinite sets and how to
count them and otherwise measure their
number that's what all this is about and
we'll look at some really cool maths
along the way hence my whiteboard here
so let me just begin the reading rather
than having a huge preamble as such as I
did in the last episode and get straight
into the book David writes the beginning
of chapter 8 mathematicians realized
centuries ago that it is possible to
work consistently and usefully with
infinity infinite say it's infinitely
large quantities and also infinitesimal
quantities also make sense many of their
properties are counter intuitive and the
introduction of theories about
infinities has always been controversial
but many facts about finite things are
just as counterintuitive
what Dawkins calls the argument from
personal incredulity is no argument it
represents nothing but a preference for
parochial misconceptions over universal
truths in physics to infinity has been
contemplated since antiquity you're
clear in space was Infinite and in any
case space was usually regarded as a
continuum even a finite line was
composed of infinitely many points
there were also infinitely many instance
between any two times but the
understanding of continuous quantities
was patchy and contradictory until
Newton and Leibnitz invented calculus a
technique for analyzing continuous
change in terms of infinite numbers of
infinitesimal changes the beginning of
infinity the possibility of the
unlimited growth of knowledge in the
future depends on a number of other
infinities one of them is the
universality in the laws of nature which
allows finite local symbols to apply to
the whole of time and space
all phenomena and all possible phenomena
another is the existence of physical
objects that I universally explain as
people which it turns out are
necessarily Universal constructors as
well and must contain Universal
classical computers I'll pause there
this is my hobby horse of course a
person is a universal classical computer
or as david says their person contains a
universal classical computer a person is
a universal classical computer in a
sense but they are that plus more they
have all the capacities that a universal
classical computer has but unlike the
universal classical computers that for
example I'm making this podcast and
video upon those computers cannot
explain anything they do not have the
capacity for explanation for learning
what we need in order for something to
be designated a person is a system that
not only is universal in its capacity to
compute but also university universally
in its capacity to explain one the
universal capacity for explanation
depends upon or has a prerequisite of
universal computation but not vice-versa
and universal computer doesn't need to
be a universal explain let's continue
with the book next paragraph says most
forms of universality themselves refer
to some sort of infinity although they
can always be interpreted in terms of
something being unlimited rather than
actually infinite this is what opponents
of infinity call a potential infinity
rather than a realized one for instance
the beginning of infinity can be
described either as a condition where
progress in the future will be unbounded
or as the condition where an infinite
amount of progress will be made but I
use those concepts interchangeably
because in this context there is no
substantive difference between them
there is a philosophy of mathematics
called finite ism there so it read the
next part the next part is about the
philosophical doctrine of finite ISM I
won't read that I encourage people to
get the book for the full understanding
of the problems with finite ISM but
suffice it to say here the question
is if one rejects the reality of
infinity then one is forced in
mathematics to conclude there must be a
large largest possible number if you
believe in finite ISM or if you think
finite ISM is true then there are not
infinite sets including the infinite set
of numbers the infinite set of integers
it must stop somewhere so therefore
there is an infinite there so therefore
there is a finite number of numbers
however in order to generate integers in
the first place what we do is we add 1
to any number that we currently do have
and so if the argument is there is a
largest possible number then we are
contradicting the rule that in order to
get to the next number we add 1 in other
words if someone comes up to you and
says if someone comes along and argues
for finite ISM then they are arguing for
a larger possible number and they must
be able to answer the question as to why
that largest possible number whatever it
is cannot have one headed to it so david
spends a number of paragraphs
criticizing finite ism criticizing
finite ISM as unreasonable and then he
runs the whole of the above discussion
assumes the universality of reason the
reach of science has inherent limits so
does mathematics so as every branch of
philosophy but if you believe that there
are bounds on the domain in which reason
is the proper arbiter of ideas then you
believe in unreasoned or the
supernatural similarly if you reject the
infinite you are stuck with the finite
and the finite is parochial so there is
no way of stopping there the best
explanation of anything eventually
involves universality and therefore
infinity the reach of explanations
cannot be limited by Fiat and skipping
just a little more and David writes
canticle found at the modern
mathematical study of infinity his
principle was defended and further
generalized in the 20th century by the
mathematician John Conway who
whimsically but appropriately named it
the mathematicians liberation movement
as those defenses suggest Cantor's
discoveries encountered vitriolic
opposition among his contemporaries
including mathematic mathematicians of
the day and also many scientists
philosophers and theologians religious
objections ironically were an effect
based on the principle of mediocrity
they characterized attempt to understand
and work with infinity as an
encroachment on the prerogatives of God
in the mid twentieth century long after
the study of infinity had become a
routine part of mathematics and had
found countless applications there the
philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein still
contemptuously denounced it as
meaningless though eventually he also
applied that accusation of the whole of
philosophy including his own work see
chapter 12 pause there and my commentary
here Vidkun stein again
yes victim Stein and Papa had a great
debate about whether or not there
existed philosophical problems at all
weaken Stein argued that there were not
there are only these things called
philosophical puzzles that every single
philosophical problem was was an
apparent problem because of our
misunderstanding of how to use language
so in other words all philosophical
problems came down to language games so
this is the this is the phrase that many
people live in today many philosophers
today still use an Vidkun Stein indeed
said of his own philosophy that it was
rather useless like the rest of
philosophy and the rest of metaphysics
what he said of his own philosophy was
it's kind of like a ladder but helps you
to climb out of a dark will and once you
are out of the dark well you can
dispense with the ladder and that's what
you thought of his own philosophy there
was this heroic thing that allowed
people to get out and become enlightened
now this is wonderful book it's called
become Stein's poker I don't have it
here with me now putting image on the
screen it's sitting on my desk at my
workplace actually I mean it Vidkun
Stein's poker is about the soul
encounter that ever happened between
between these two big names in
philosophy victim style and popper and
this great debate about whether or not
there were philosophical problems it's
called Big Ben Stein's poker because
apparently during the debate although
accounts of what actually happened
differ apparently at some point the
Vidkun Stein picked up the poker out of
the fireplace and pointed at popper in
order taken
as a point hey yes but there's some
debate about whether or not that happens
so it's an interesting sociological the
study of these two communities of
philosophers or philosophies as well as
the debate itself so I recommend this
book and I'll just say on the point I'd
say it sounds like a very clever thing
to say and I I think it is one of the
better things that possibly that can
stand inside is clever that his own
philosophy is kind of like a ladder out
of now from which you used to escape a
will it's a great analogy but ultimately
it is a false analogy it's a false
analogy because you cannot escape from
the problems of philosophy the problems
of philosophy are not like a will and
the will is always there you are forever
climbing out of the will and the ladder
I suppose is useful this is the
philosophical progress that you're
making but it is an infinite climb it is
an infinite climb towards the light if
you like which is an infinitely far
distance off so the I suppose the ladder
analogy works but you just can't get out
of the well that's the mistake that
vegans don't made skipping a little more
and then David Wright in mathematics
infinity is studied by infinite sets
meaning sets with infinitely many
members the defining property of an
infinite set is that some part of it has
as many elements as the whole thing for
instance think of the natural numbers
now I'll pause he and David goes through
some example so I'll go through I'll go
through the example over here we've got
the counting numbers here I've added
I've added zero two numbers so we've got
integer numbers so starting at zero we
go one two three four okay off to
infinity now imagine we just take part
of that set just the even numbers 0 2 4
6 8 well it looks like this has half as
many members doesn't it but in fact it
doesn't it has exactly the same number
of members and the reason why is because
for every single number that I can write
in the first set I can write a number in
the second set now we'll never run out
in the second set even though it doesn't
include all of the numbers that are in
the first set and so what we say is that
they these two sets her in one-to-one
correspondence for every member we can
write down another member in the upper
set and so on if we did then three times
tables three six nine twelve etc if you
take part of this first set and write it
down here we have a one-to-one
correspondence and so therefore the size
of the infinity is the same they're both
infinitely long we'll never get to the
end but we're going to see in a very
short moment that there are kinds of
infinity that are bigger than other
kinds of infinity and the first thing
I'll preface it to say is this one's a
countable infinity we can literally
count at 0 1 2 3 4 well this one 0 2 4 6
8 countable infinities they're infinite
but they're not as big as other
infinities that we're about to come to
now so far I've skipped a actual
substantial bit of the beginning of this
chapter but now I'm going to read an
extended bit of this chapter I thought
it's really entertaining this part and
so let me just get straight into it
David writes the mathematician David
Hilbert devised a thought experiment to
illustrate some of the intuitions the
one has to drop when reasoning about
infinity he imagined a hotel with
infinitely many rooms infinity hotel the
rooms are numbered with the natural
numbers starting with 1 and ending with
what the last room number is not
infinity first of all there is no last
room the idea that any numbered set of
rooms has a highest numbered member is
the first intuition from everyday life
we have to drop second in any finite
hotel whose rooms were numbered from 1
there would be a number whose room
equalled the total number of rooms and
other rooms whose numbers were close to
that if there were 10 rooms one of them
will be ruined number 10 and there would
be a room number of 9 as well but
infinity hotel where the number of rooms
is infinity all the rooms have numbers
infinitely far below infinity now
imagine that infinity hotel is fully
occupied each room contains one guest
and cannot contain more with finite
hotels fully occupied is the same thing
as
no room for more guests but infinity
hotel always has room for more so this
pause there so that's so that's another
strange intuition and it kind of it
illuminates some of the struggle we have
in trying to capture mathematical
reality and mathematical truth in normal
natural language like English so again
he writes if the hotel is fully occupied
in the case of of a finite hotel fully
occupied means there's no room for
anyone else that's what fully occupied
means but if you've got an infinitely
large hotel fully occupied means there
still room that seems like a
contradiction it's not and david's about
to explain why so let me continue
reading one of the conditions of staying
there is that guests have to change
rooms if asked by the management so if a
new guest arrives the management just
announced over the public address system
we'll all guess please move immediately
to the room number one more than their
current room that's the existing
occupant of room one moved to room to
his occupant rooms two room three and so
on
what happened to the last room there is
no last room and hence no problem about
what happens there the new arrival can
now move into room one at infinity hotel
it is never necessary to make a
reservation evidently no such places at
infinity hotel could exist in our
universe because it violates several
laws of physics however this is a
mathematical thought experiment so the
only constraint on the imaginary laws of
physics is that they be consistent it is
because of the requirement that they be
consistent that they are counter
intuitive intuitions abound in finding
are often illogical there is pause
daters to remark that we have to keep in
mind throughout these thought
experiments that infinity hotel is not
of our universe infinity hotel is in is
in abstract space so to speak and so it
can violate laws of physics that does
not obey our laws of physics and this is
absolutely crucial because it's going to
eliminate something about our horse of
physics okay so let's keep on going
david writes it is a bit awkward to have
to keep changing room
though they're all identical and I
freshly made up every time a guest moves
in but guests love staying in infinity
hotel that's because it is cheap only a
dollar a night it extraordinarily large
Uranus how is that possible every day
when the management receive all the room
rents of one dollar per room they spend
the income as follows
with the dollars they received from the
rooms numbered one to a thousand they
buy complimentary champagne strawberries
housekeeping services and all the other
overheads just for room number one with
the dollars they receive in the rooms
number 2001 to 2002 the same for room 2
and so on in this way each room receives
several hundred dollars worth of goods
and services every day and the
management make a profit as well all
from their income of one dollar a room
word gets around and one day an
infinitely long train pulls up at the
local station containing infinitely many
people wanting to stay at the hotel
making infinitely many public address
announcements will take too long and
anyway the hotel rules say that each
guest can be asked to perform only a
finite number of actions per day but no
matter the management merely announced
we'll all guests please move immediately
to the room number that is doubled out
of their current room obviously back and
all do that and afterwards the only
occupied rooms are the even-numbered
ones leaving the odd-numbered ones free
for new arrivals that is exactly enough
to receive the infinitely many new
guests because there are exactly as many
odd numbers as there are natural numbers
and that's just as we can see here of
course this equally as many even numbers
as there are natural numbers here
counting numbers and there will be
equally as many odd numbers as well so
if a person who no one moves to person
in 2 moves to 4 then we're left with
room number 1 being free in room number
3 being free and so on ok so in that
thought experiment we've had an
infinitely long train turn up to
infinity hotel that's packed to the brim
with an infinite number of people but
are still accommodated inside of the
hotel and the next thought experiment
even though so David writes then one day
an infinite number of infinitely long
trains arrive at the station all full of
guests for the hotel
but the managers are still unperturbed
they just make a slightly more
complicated announcement which readers
who are familiar with mathematical
terminology can see in the footnote the
upshot is everyone is accommodated so
even an infinite number of infinite long
trains with an infant number of people I
need to try and can still be
accommodated in in infinity hotel which
is just to say there is a one-to-one
correspondence between those two sets
the set of infinitely long trains the
infinite set of infinitely long trains
each of which have an infinite number of
people in them and the set of natural
numbers here but then David Wright
however it is mathematically possible to
overwhelm the capacity of infinity hotel
in a remarkable series of discoveries in
the 1870s cantle proved among other
things that not all infinitives are
equal in particular the infinity of the
continuum the number of points in a
finite line which is the same as the
number of points in the whole of space
or space-time is much larger than the
infinity of the natural numbers Cantor
proved this by proving that there can be
no one-to-one correspondence between the
natural numbers and the point on a line
that set of points is a higher order
event of infinity than the set of
natural numbers and then David does an
explanation of Cantor's diagonal
argument I'm going to do a slightly
different version here so it's kind of
the version that you will see if you
just look up Cantor's diagonal ization
argument okay so let's start again end
and here we're going to use the binary
system in other words just the numbers 0
& 1 so if we were to write down all the
different permutations different ways in
which we could write a infinitely long
sequence of zeros and ones let's see
what we do so maybe we could if we're
just going to write we could write just
zeros that would be an infinitely long
sequence of nothing but zeros boring or
an infinitely long sequence of just ones
ok fine and now if we start to combine
that maybe we could do a and
alternating series of one zero one zero
one zero
oh well we could get to the opposite
zero one zero one one
oh maybe we could do two ones and a zero
two one zero
oh maybe two zeros and a one two zeros
and a one well maybe it could be three
months and if you're in two zeros 1 0 or
three zeros three ones I'm Susie Rose
you can imagine all the different
possible permutations of ways of writing
zeroes and ones all the infinite morally
different kinds of infinitely long
sequences of zeros and ones now it's at
this point I realized my microphone had
ceased working and so we're gonna have
to continue this explanation in the very
next episode where I can promise the
audio is far better anyway we'll see you
then
[Music]